Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the diuretics.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the diuretics. Classify them by their site of action.
The diuretics are drugs that increase the excretion of water and electrolytes by
the kidney, and they are best classified by their site of action along the nephron.
The carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, such as acetazolamide,
act on the proximal convoluted tubule.
The osmotic diuretics, such as mannitol,
act mainly on the proximal tubule and the descending limb.
The loop diuretics, such as furosemide,
act on the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle,
inhibiting the sodium-potassium-two-chloride cotransporter.
The thiazides, such as bendroflumethiazide, act on the distal convoluted tubule,
inhibiting the sodium-chloride cotransporter.
And the potassium-sparing diuretics act on the collecting duct — the aldosterone
antagonists such as spironolactone,
and the sodium-channel blockers such as amiloride.
So they are classified by where along the nephron they act,
which determines their potency, their effect on electrolytes and acid-base,
and their clinical uses.
Describe the loop diuretics.
The loop diuretics, of which furosemide is the prototype,
are the most powerful diuretics.
They act on the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle,
inhibiting the sodium-potassium-two-chloride cotransporter,
so that a large fraction of the filtered sodium, with chloride,
potassium and water, is not reabsorbed and is excreted,
producing a marked diuresis; by abolishing the medullary concentration gradient
they also impair urinary concentration.
They are used for fluid overload — in heart failure, pulmonary oedema,
and renal and hepatic oedema — given orally or intravenously,
the intravenous route also producing a useful venodilatation in acute pulmonary
oedema.
Their adverse effects are the consequences of the brisk loss: hypovolaemia,
hypokalaemia, hyponatraemia, hypomagnesaemia, a metabolic alkalosis, hypocalcaemia,
and ototoxicity with rapid high doses, and they raise urate.
So the loop diuretics are the potent agents for fluid overload,
with electrolyte loss and ototoxicity as the main hazards.
Describe the thiazide diuretics.
The thiazides, such as bendroflumethiazide and the thiazide-like indapamide,
act on the distal convoluted tubule, inhibiting the sodium-chloride cotransporter,
producing a moderate diuresis less powerful than the loop agents.
Their principal use is in the treatment of hypertension,
where their long-term benefit owes as much to a vasodilatory effect as to diuresis,
and in mild fluid overload.
Their adverse effects are characteristic: hypokalaemia and hyponatraemia;
a metabolic alkalosis; and a set of metabolic disturbances — hyperglycaemia,
worsening glucose tolerance; hyperuricaemia, which can precipitate gout;
and hypercalcaemia, since unlike the loop diuretics they reduce calcium excretion.
They are ineffective in significant renal impairment.
So the thiazides are moderate diuretics used mainly for hypertension,
with hypokalaemia, hyponatraemia and the metabolic effects of hyperglycaemia,
hyperuricaemia and hypercalcaemia as their hallmark adverse effects.
Describe the potassium-sparing diuretics.
The potassium-sparing diuretics act on the collecting duct and,
as their name implies, conserve potassium rather than wasting it.
They are of two kinds.
The aldosterone antagonists, spironolactone and eplerenone,
block the aldosterone receptor, reducing sodium reabsorption and potassium
excretion; they are weak diuretics but are valuable in heart failure,
where they improve survival, in resistant hypertension,
in primary hyperaldosteronism, and in the ascites of liver disease.
The sodium-channel blockers, amiloride and triamterene,
block the epithelial sodium channel directly,
with a similar potassium-sparing effect.
Their characteristic and dangerous adverse effect is hyperkalaemia,
particularly with renal impairment and with the renin-angiotensin blockers;
spironolactone also causes gynaecomastia through its anti-androgen effect,
which eplerenone avoids.
So the potassium-sparing agents conserve potassium,
with spironolactone improving survival in heart failure,
and hyperkalaemia as their key hazard.
Describe mannitol and the osmotic diuretics.
Mannitol is an osmotic diuretic, a sugar alcohol that is filtered at the glomerulus
but not reabsorbed, so it remains in the tubular fluid and, by its osmotic effect,
holds water within the tubule, increasing water and, to a lesser extent,
sodium excretion.
Given intravenously, it also transiently expands the intravascular volume and
raises plasma osmolality, drawing water out of the cells.
Its main uses are the reduction of raised intracranial pressure and cerebral
oedema, where it draws water from the brain across the blood-brain barrier;
the reduction of intra-ocular pressure;
and historically the maintenance of urine flow in some settings.
Its cautions are the transient circulatory overload from the volume expansion,
which can precipitate heart failure, and rebound effects.
So mannitol is the osmotic diuretic used principally to reduce raised intracranial
and intra-ocular pressure by osmotically drawing water out of the brain and eye.
Describe acetazolamide and the carbonic anhydrase inhibitors.
Acetazolamide inhibits the enzyme carbonic anhydrase in the proximal convoluted
tubule, which normally catalyses the reactions allowing bicarbonate reabsorption;
by inhibiting it, acetazolamide causes the loss of bicarbonate,
sodium and water in the urine, producing a weak diuresis and, importantly,
a metabolic acidosis with an alkaline urine.
It is a weak diuretic and is used less for diuresis than for its other effects:
in glaucoma, where it reduces the formation of aqueous humour and so intra-ocular
pressure; in the prophylaxis and treatment of altitude sickness,
where the induced metabolic acidosis stimulates ventilation;
and to correct a metabolic alkalosis.
So acetazolamide is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor and weak diuretic whose main
clinical uses arise from its other actions — in glaucoma, altitude sickness,
and the correction of metabolic alkalosis — producing a metabolic acidosis as part
of its effect.
Summarise the effects of the diuretics on electrolytes and acid-base balance.
The diuretics disturb electrolytes and acid-base in patterns characteristic of
their site of action.
The loop diuretics and thiazides both cause hypokalaemia and a metabolic alkalosis,
by delivering more sodium to the distal nephron where it is exchanged for potassium
and hydrogen, and both cause hyponatraemia; they differ on calcium,
the loop agents increasing and the thiazides decreasing its excretion.
The potassium-sparing agents cause the opposite — hyperkalaemia — and a tendency to
metabolic acidosis. The carbonic anhydrase inhibitors cause a metabolic acidosis
with bicarbonate loss.
These predictable disturbances are the basis of monitoring electrolytes on diuretic
therapy, of combining a potassium-losing with a potassium-sparing agent,
and of the danger of combining potassium-sparing diuretics with the
renin-angiotensin blockers.
So each class has a signature electrolyte and acid-base effect that guides its safe
use.
What are the main clinical indications for the diuretics?
The indications follow the agents. The loop diuretics are used for fluid overload —
the pulmonary and peripheral oedema of heart failure,
and the oedema of renal and hepatic disease — and in acute pulmonary oedema,
and they remain effective in renal impairment.
The thiazides are used chiefly for hypertension and for mild oedema.
The aldosterone antagonists are used in heart failure, where they improve survival,
in resistant hypertension, in primary hyperaldosteronism,
and in the ascites of cirrhosis, where spironolactone is the diuretic of choice.
Mannitol is used for raised intracranial and intra-ocular pressure.
Acetazolamide is used in glaucoma and altitude sickness.
So the loop agents are for fluid overload, the thiazides for hypertension,
the aldosterone antagonists for heart failure and ascites,
and the osmotic and carbonic anhydrase agents for their specialised
pressure-lowering and other uses.
What perioperative considerations attach to diuretic therapy?
Several.
Patients on long-term diuretics may have electrolyte disturbances — particularly
hypokalaemia from the loop and thiazide agents,
or hyperkalaemia from the potassium-sparing agents — and a degree of volume
depletion, which should be assessed and corrected before anaesthesia,
since hypokalaemia predisposes to arrhythmias and potentiates neuromuscular
blockers, and hypovolaemia to hypotension on induction.
Diuretics are commonly omitted on the morning of surgery to avoid intraoperative
diuresis and volume depletion, although those for heart failure may be continued
where fluid overload is the greater risk. The underlying condition — heart failure,
hypertension — must be considered.
Postoperatively, fluid balance and electrolytes are monitored.
So the perioperative considerations are to check and correct electrolytes and
volume, often to omit the diuretic on the day,
and to manage the underlying condition and fluid balance carefully.
Pull it together: how do you use the diuretics rationally?
I would choose the diuretic by the indication and use the electrolyte and acid-base
effects of each class to anticipate and monitor for harm.
For fluid overload and pulmonary oedema I would use a loop diuretic,
the most potent and effective even in renal impairment, watching for hypovolaemia,
hypokalaemia and the other losses. For hypertension I would use a thiazide,
mindful of its metabolic effects.
For heart failure and for cirrhotic ascites I would use an aldosterone antagonist,
which improves survival in heart failure, watching for hyperkalaemia,
especially alongside a renin-angiotensin blocker.
For raised intracranial or intra-ocular pressure I would use mannitol,
and for glaucoma or altitude sickness acetazolamide.
I would monitor electrolytes and fluid balance,
combine potassium-losing and potassium-sparing agents thoughtfully,
and in the perioperative period assess and correct electrolytes and volume and
often omit the diuretic on the day.
So rational use matches the agent to the indication and anticipates its signature
disturbances.
Take me through the handling of sodium and water along the nephron.
The nephron reabsorbs almost all of the filtered sodium and water in a sequence
that the diuretics exploit.
The proximal convoluted tubule reabsorbs the bulk,
around sixty-five per cent of the filtered sodium, iso-osmotically with water,
and this is where carbonic anhydrase enables bicarbonate reabsorption.
The thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle reabsorbs around a further
twenty-five per cent through the sodium-potassium-two-chloride cotransporter,
and being impermeable to water it dilutes the tubular fluid and,
with the counter-current arrangement, builds the medullary concentration gradient.
The distal convoluted tubule reabsorbs around five per cent through the
sodium-chloride cotransporter.
The collecting duct reabsorbs the final few per cent under the control of
aldosterone, through the epithelial sodium channel,
and water under the control of antidiuretic hormone.
So the diuretics are more potent the more proximal and the larger the sodium load
at their site — hence the power of the loop agents.
Explain the counter-current multiplier and why it matters for diuretics.
The counter-current multiplier is the mechanism by which the loop of Henle
generates the hypertonic medullary interstitium needed to concentrate the urine.
The active reabsorption of sodium and chloride from the water-impermeable thick
ascending limb makes the interstitium hypertonic and the tubular fluid hypotonic;
the hairpin arrangement of the descending and ascending limbs,
carrying fluid in opposite directions,
multiplies this single effect along the length of the loop,
producing a steep cortico-medullary osmotic gradient,
maintained by the vasa recta acting as counter-current exchangers.
This gradient allows water to be reabsorbed from the collecting duct under
antidiuretic hormone.
The loop diuretics, by blocking the cotransporter in the thick ascending limb,
abolish the multiplier and so the gradient,
which both produces the brisk diuresis and impairs the ability to concentrate the
urine.
So the counter-current multiplier builds the concentrating gradient that the loop
diuretics dismantle.
What is diuretic resistance, and how is it overcome?
Diuretic resistance is an inadequate diuretic response despite adequate doses,
common in heart failure, renal and hepatic disease.
Its causes include reduced delivery of the drug to its tubular site — from poor
absorption, low renal blood flow, or, for the protein-bound loop agents,
hypoalbuminaemia; activation of sodium-retaining mechanisms; and,
with chronic loop-diuretic use, hypertrophy of the distal tubule which reabsorbs
the extra sodium delivered to it, the so-called braking phenomenon.
It is overcome by ensuring delivery — using intravenous dosing or infusion and
adequate doses; by treating the underlying state and restricting sodium;
and by sequential nephron blockade,
adding a thiazide to a loop diuretic to block the compensatory distal reabsorption,
which produces a powerful synergistic diuresis requiring careful monitoring for
excessive electrolyte loss.
So diuretic resistance arises from impaired delivery and distal compensation,
overcome by adequate intravenous dosing and by combining a thiazide with a loop
diuretic.
Describe the pharmacokinetics of furosemide relevant to its use.
Furosemide is highly protein-bound,
so it is not filtered at the glomerulus but is secreted into the proximal tubule by
the organic anion transporter to reach its site of action on the luminal side of
the thick ascending limb; this is why its delivery, and so its effect,
depends on renal blood flow and tubular secretion and is impaired in renal failure,
requiring higher doses, and why other organic anions can compete.
Its oral bioavailability is incomplete and variable, around fifty per cent,
so a larger oral than intravenous dose is needed,
and in gut oedema absorption is impaired. It has a short duration,
so its effect is brisk but limited, and in hypoalbuminaemia its delivery is reduced.
So furosemide reaches its luminal site by tubular secretion,
with variable oral absorption and a dependence on renal delivery,
all of which shape its dosing, particularly the need for intravenous or higher
doses in renal impairment and oedematous states.
What is ethacrynic acid, and when is it useful?
Ethacrynic acid is a loop diuretic that, like furosemide,
acts on the sodium-potassium-two-chloride cotransporter of the thick ascending
limb, but it is not a sulphonamide derivative.
This is its niche: the other loop diuretics and the thiazides are sulphonamides,
so in the rare patient with a genuine severe sulphonamide allergy,
ethacrynic acid provides a loop diuretic without that structure.
It is otherwise similar in action to furosemide but is regarded as more ototoxic,
which limits its routine use.
So ethacrynic acid is the non-sulphonamide loop diuretic reserved chiefly for
patients with sulphonamide allergy who need a loop diuretic,
at the cost of greater ototoxicity,
a small but examinable point about diuretic chemistry and cross-reactivity.
Why do the thiazides affect calcium, urate and glucose as they do?
The thiazides have characteristic metabolic effects.
Unlike the loop diuretics, which increase calcium excretion,
the thiazides reduce urinary calcium excretion,
by enhancing its reabsorption in the distal tubule,
which causes a tendency to hypercalcaemia but is therapeutically useful in reducing
the formation of calcium kidney stones and in protecting bone.
They raise serum urate, by competing with its secretion and through volume
contraction enhancing its reabsorption, which can precipitate gout.
They impair glucose tolerance, raising blood glucose,
partly through hypokalaemia impairing insulin secretion.
They also raise lipids modestly. These metabolic effects,
together with hypokalaemia and hyponatraemia,
are the price of thiazide therapy and influence their use in patients with gout,
diabetes or a tendency to hyponatraemia.
So the thiazides reduce calcium excretion — useful in stones and bone — and raise
urate and glucose, distinctive metabolic effects that guide their use.
Describe the SGLT2 inhibitors as diuretic agents.
The sodium-glucose cotransporter-two inhibitors,
such as empagliflozin and dapagliflozin,
block the cotransporter in the proximal tubule that reabsorbs filtered glucose and
sodium, so they cause glucose and sodium to be lost in the urine,
producing an osmotic and natriuretic diuresis as well as lowering blood glucose.
Developed as antidiabetic drugs, they have been shown in large trials to improve
outcomes in heart failure, including in patients without diabetes,
and to be renoprotective in chronic kidney disease, reducing progression.
Their diuretic and natriuretic action contributes to the heart-failure benefit,
alongside other mechanisms.
Their adverse effects include genital and urinary infections, volume depletion,
and a risk of euglycaemic diabetic ketoacidosis, relevant perioperatively,
so they are usually withheld for some days before major surgery.
So the SGLT2 inhibitors cause a glucosuric,
natriuretic diuresis and have become important in heart failure and kidney disease,
with euglycaemic ketoacidosis a key perioperative concern.
Describe the vaptans and their use in hyponatraemia.
The vaptans, such as tolvaptan, are antagonists at the vasopressin V2 receptor in
the collecting duct, where antidiuretic hormone normally promotes water
reabsorption through aquaporin channels.
By blocking this, they cause the excretion of water without electrolyte — a pure
water diuresis, or aquaresis — raising the serum sodium.
Their use is in hyponatraemia from water retention,
particularly the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion and in
some heart failure, where they raise the sodium.
The serum sodium must be monitored carefully and corrected gradually,
because too rapid a rise risks osmotic demyelination.
Tolvaptan is also used to slow polycystic kidney disease.
So the vaptans block the V2 receptor to produce a water-only diuresis that corrects
dilutional hyponatraemia, used with careful monitoring to avoid over-rapid
correction, a distinctive mechanism among the agents affecting renal water handling.
What are the contraindications and cautions of mannitol?
Mannitol, given to reduce raised intracranial or intra-ocular pressure,
has important cautions arising from its mechanism.
By expanding the intravascular volume osmotically before it is excreted,
it can precipitate or worsen pulmonary oedema and heart failure,
so it is contraindicated in established pulmonary oedema and used cautiously in
cardiac failure.
It is contraindicated in anuria from established renal failure,
since if it cannot be excreted it accumulates and worsens the volume overload and
hyperosmolality.
With a disrupted blood-brain barrier it may pass into the brain and draw water in,
causing rebound rises in intracranial pressure.
It causes electrolyte disturbances and, with repeated dosing, a high osmolar gap.
So mannitol is contraindicated in pulmonary oedema and anuria,
cautioned in heart failure and a disrupted blood-brain barrier,
and requires monitoring of volume status, electrolytes and osmolality,
the cautions following directly from its osmotic, volume-expanding action.
Detail the acid-base and clinical effects of acetazolamide.
Acetazolamide inhibits carbonic anhydrase in the proximal tubule,
preventing the reabsorption of bicarbonate,
which is then lost in the urine along with sodium and water,
producing an alkaline urine and a hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis.
This acid-base effect underlies several of its uses.
In glaucoma, inhibition of carbonic anhydrase in the ciliary body reduces the
formation of aqueous humour and so the intra-ocular pressure.
In altitude sickness, the induced metabolic acidosis stimulates ventilation,
counteracting the respiratory alkalosis of the hypoxic ventilatory drive and
improving acclimatisation.
It is used to correct a metabolic alkalosis,
including that produced by other diuretics, and to alkalinise the urine.
Its diuretic effect is weak and self-limiting as the acidosis develops.
So acetazolamide produces a metabolic acidosis with bicarbonate loss,
which is the basis of its use in glaucoma,
altitude sickness and the correction of metabolic alkalosis.
What are the uses of spironolactone beyond diuresis?
Spironolactone, by antagonising aldosterone,
has several uses beyond simple diuresis. In heart failure with reduced ejection
fraction it improves survival, as shown in major trials,
and is a key prognostic drug rather than merely a diuretic.
It is the treatment for primary hyperaldosteronism, Conn's syndrome,
controlling the hypertension and hypokalaemia.
It is used in resistant hypertension as the fourth-line agent.
In cirrhosis with ascites it is the diuretic of choice,
countering the secondary hyperaldosteronism.
And, through its anti-androgen action,
it is used in hirsutism and polycystic ovary syndrome and in acne,
though this same action causes gynaecomastia as a side effect,
which the more selective eplerenone avoids.
So spironolactone is used for its survival benefit in heart failure,
for primary hyperaldosteronism, resistant hypertension and cirrhotic ascites,
and for its anti-androgen effects, well beyond its modest direct diuretic action.
Explain the ototoxicity of the loop diuretics.
The loop diuretics can cause ototoxicity — tinnitus, hearing impairment and,
rarely, permanent deafness — which is usually reversible but can be permanent.
It is thought to arise because the sodium-potassium-two-chloride cotransporter that
they block is also present in the stria vascularis of the inner ear,
where it maintains the ionic composition of the endolymph,
so the drug disturbs the endolymph and cochlear function.
The risk is greatest with rapid intravenous injection of high doses,
in renal failure where levels are high,
and with concurrent other ototoxic drugs such as the aminoglycoside antibiotics,
whose ototoxicity is additive.
It is minimised by giving large intravenous doses slowly,
by infusion rather than rapid bolus,
and by caution with the dose in renal impairment and with other ototoxic drugs.
So loop-diuretic ototoxicity reflects the cotransporter's role in the inner ear,
is dose- and rate-related, and is minimised by slow administration and caution in
renal failure and with aminoglycosides.
How are diuretics used to reduce raised intracranial pressure?
Two diuretics are used to reduce raised intracranial pressure by different
mechanisms.
Mannitol, an osmotic diuretic, raises the plasma osmolality so that water is drawn
out of the brain across the intact blood-brain barrier into the circulation,
reducing brain water and intracranial pressure,
with an additional effect on blood rheology; it is given as a bolus,
with monitoring of osmolality and volume status,
and the alternative hypertonic saline works similarly by osmosis.
Furosemide is sometimes used as an adjunct,
reducing cerebrospinal fluid production and complementing mannitol.
The aim is to reduce intracranial pressure as part of the wider management of the
brain-injured patient, alongside positioning,
ventilation and the treatment of the cause.
So mannitol osmotically dehydrates the brain to lower intracranial pressure,
with furosemide as an adjunct, an important application of diuretics in
neuro-critical care.
What electrolyte monitoring and replacement accompany diuretic therapy?
Diuretic therapy requires monitoring of the electrolytes and renal function,
with the pattern depending on the agent.
With the loop and thiazide diuretics I would monitor for hypokalaemia,
hyponatraemia, and a metabolic alkalosis, and for hypomagnesaemia,
replacing potassium and magnesium as needed — by supplements,
by combining with a potassium-sparing agent,
or by using a converting-enzyme inhibitor that raises potassium.
With the potassium-sparing diuretics I would monitor for hyperkalaemia,
especially in renal impairment and with renin-angiotensin blockers,
and a metabolic acidosis. I would monitor renal function and volume status,
as over-diuresis causes hypovolaemia and prerenal injury.
Hyponatraemia from thiazides can be severe, particularly in the elderly.
So monitoring is tailored to the agent — potassium and magnesium with the wasting
agents, potassium with the sparing agents — alongside renal function and volume,
with replacement or combination to maintain balance.
Give a final integrated summary of diuretic use.
I would choose the diuretic by indication and anticipate its signature disturbance.
For fluid overload and pulmonary oedema, a loop diuretic,
the most potent and effective even in renal impairment,
given intravenously when delivery or speed matters, watching for hypovolaemia,
hypokalaemia and ototoxicity, and using a thiazide in combination for resistance.
For hypertension, a thiazide-like diuretic, mindful of hypokalaemia,
hyponatraemia and the metabolic effects. For heart failure and cirrhotic ascites,
an aldosterone antagonist, which improves survival in heart failure,
watching potassium.
For raised intracranial or intra-ocular pressure, mannitol;
for glaucoma and altitude sickness, acetazolamide; for dilutional hyponatraemia,
a vaptan with careful sodium monitoring.
I would monitor electrolytes, renal function and volume throughout,
and in the perioperative period assess and correct these,
often omitting the diuretic on the day.
So rational diuretic use matches the agent and route to the indication and manages
its predictable electrolyte and volume consequences.
Describe the physiology of aldosterone and its relevance to the potassium-sparing
agents.
Aldosterone, the mineralocorticoid from the adrenal cortex,
is released in response to angiotensin two, a rise in potassium, and corticotrophin.
It acts on the principal cells of the collecting duct,
where it increases the number and activity of the epithelial sodium channels and
the sodium-potassium pump, promoting sodium reabsorption and, in exchange,
the secretion of potassium and hydrogen.
So aldosterone conserves sodium and water and excretes potassium and acid.
The aldosterone antagonists, spironolactone and eplerenone, block its receptor,
and the sodium-channel blockers, amiloride and triamterene,
block the channel it upregulates; both therefore reduce sodium reabsorption and,
crucially, retain potassium and hydrogen,
causing hyperkalaemia and a tendency to acidosis — the mirror image of the loop and
thiazide diuretics.
So understanding aldosterone's action on the collecting duct explains both the
diuretic and the potassium-sparing,
acidosis-promoting effects of these agents and their danger of hyperkalaemia.
Describe amiloride and triamterene and their specific uses.
Amiloride and triamterene are the potassium-sparing diuretics that act not on the
aldosterone receptor but directly, by blocking the epithelial sodium channel in the
collecting duct, reducing sodium reabsorption and potassium loss.
They are weak diuretics, used mainly in combination with a loop or thiazide
diuretic to counteract the potassium loss of those agents and provide a modest
additional diuresis.
Amiloride has specific uses: it counteracts the hypokalaemia of other diuretics and
of hyperaldosteronism, and it is used in lithium-induced nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus and in the rare Liddle's syndrome,
a disorder of the epithelial sodium channel.
Their main hazard, like the aldosterone antagonists, is hyperkalaemia,
especially with renal impairment and renin-angiotensin blockers.
So amiloride and triamterene block the epithelial sodium channel to spare
potassium, used chiefly with potassium-wasting diuretics,
with amiloride having niche uses in lithium-induced diabetes insipidus and Liddle's
syndrome.
How are diuretics used in the oedema of cirrhosis and nephrotic syndrome?
In these oedematous states the diuretic strategy is adapted to the pathophysiology.
In cirrhotic ascites there is secondary hyperaldosteronism,
so spironolactone is the diuretic of choice,
often combined with furosemide in a set ratio to maintain potassium balance and
improve the diuresis, with cautious daily targets to avoid precipitating
hypovolaemia, renal impairment and hepatic encephalopathy.
In the nephrotic syndrome, oedema is treated with loop diuretics,
but the response can be poor because of avid sodium retention and because the heavy
proteinuria binds the protein-bound furosemide within the tubule and
hypoalbuminaemia reduces its delivery, so higher doses,
intravenous administration or combination with a thiazide may be needed.
So cirrhotic ascites is treated with spironolactone, with furosemide added,
and nephrotic oedema with loop diuretics at higher or combined doses to overcome
the resistance, each strategy following the underlying mechanism.
What are the important drug interactions of the diuretics?
The diuretics have several important interactions.
The potassium-wasting loop and thiazide diuretics cause hypokalaemia,
which potentiates digoxin toxicity and increases the risk of arrhythmia,
and they cause hypovolaemia that potentiates the hypotension of other agents.
The potassium-sparing diuretics and aldosterone antagonists combined with
renin-angiotensin blockers or potassium supplements risk dangerous hyperkalaemia.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs reduce the effect of diuretics by inhibiting
the prostaglandins that mediate part of the renal response,
and together with diuretics and renin-angiotensin blockers — the triple whammy —
they precipitate acute kidney injury.
The thiazides and loop diuretics raise lithium levels by enhancing its
reabsorption, risking lithium toxicity.
So key interactions are hypokalaemia potentiating digoxin,
hyperkalaemia with renin-angiotensin blockers,
the triple whammy with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs causing renal injury,
and raised lithium levels, all requiring vigilance and monitoring.
Distinguish thiazides from thiazide-like diuretics.
The thiazide diuretics, such as bendroflumethiazide and hydrochlorothiazide,
and the thiazide-like diuretics, such as indapamide and chlortalidone,
both act on the sodium-chloride cotransporter in the distal convoluted tubule and
share the general profile, but they differ in some respects relevant to
hypertension.
The thiazide-like agents, particularly chlortalidone and indapamide,
have a longer duration of action and, in outcome trials,
have shown at least as good or better cardiovascular event reduction,
so guidelines increasingly prefer them for hypertension.
Indapamide may have additional vasodilator properties.
They share the adverse effects of hypokalaemia,
hyponatraemia and the metabolic disturbances, chlortalidone perhaps more so.
So although the two groups act at the same site,
the longer-acting thiazide-like agents indapamide and chlortalidone are now often
preferred for hypertension on the basis of outcome evidence,
a current point of prescribing practice.
How are loop diuretics used to treat hypercalcaemia?
The loop diuretics have a specific role in the management of hypercalcaemia
because, unlike the thiazides, they increase urinary calcium excretion,
by inhibiting the cotransporter in the thick ascending limb on which the
reabsorption of calcium partly depends.
The essential first step in significant hypercalcaemia, however,
is rehydration with intravenous saline,
since these patients are volume-depleted and saline both restores volume and
promotes calcium excretion.
A loop diuretic may then be added, once the patient is rehydrated,
to further enhance calcium excretion and to manage the fluid load,
but it should not be used before rehydration,
as in the volume-depleted patient it would worsen the depletion.
Definitive treatment addresses the cause, with bisphosphonates for malignancy.
So loop diuretics enhance calcium excretion in hypercalcaemia but only after
rehydration with saline, which is the priority,
the loop diuretic being an adjunct rather than the primary treatment.
Describe the management of diuretic-induced hyponatraemia.
Diuretic-induced hyponatraemia, most often from the thiazides and particularly in
elderly women, arises from sodium loss with water retention and impaired free-water
excretion, and it can be severe and symptomatic.
The management depends on the severity and rate of onset.
The offending diuretic is stopped. Severe symptomatic hyponatraemia with
neurological features is a medical emergency treated with hypertonic saline to
raise the sodium by a small, controlled amount to relieve cerebral oedema.
The crucial principle is that the correction must be gradual — not exceeding a
defined limit over twenty-four hours — because too rapid a rise in sodium risks
osmotic demyelination, a devastating complication.
Asymptomatic or chronic hyponatraemia is corrected slowly by fluid restriction and
removing the cause.
So diuretic-induced hyponatraemia is managed by stopping the drug and correcting
the sodium at a controlled, limited rate,
urgently with hypertonic saline if severely symptomatic,
always avoiding over-rapid correction.
What perioperative issues arise specifically with the SGLT2 inhibitors?
The sodium-glucose cotransporter-two inhibitors,
increasingly prescribed for diabetes, heart failure and kidney disease,
raise a specific perioperative concern:
they predispose to euglycaemic diabetic ketoacidosis — a ketoacidosis occurring
without the marked hyperglycaemia that usually signals it,
so it is easily missed — precipitated by the fasting,
stress and dehydration of surgery.
For this reason guidance recommends withholding these drugs for a few days before
major or emergency surgery, and being alert to ketoacidosis in the unwell
perioperative patient on them, checking ketones even when the glucose is not high.
They also cause a volume-depleting diuresis and genitourinary infections.
So the SGLT2 inhibitors must be withheld before surgery and euglycaemic
ketoacidosis actively considered, an important and relatively new perioperative
pharmacology point, reflecting their diuretic and metabolic actions.
How do the diuretics differ in onset, potency and duration?
The classes differ usefully in these respects.
The loop diuretics are the most potent,
with a rapid onset — within minutes intravenously — and a short duration of a few
hours, giving a brisk, intense diuresis suited to acute fluid overload.
The thiazides are of moderate potency, slower in onset and longer in duration,
suited to the sustained, gentle effect wanted in hypertension.
The potassium-sparing agents are weak,
with the aldosterone antagonists having a slow onset over days because they act by
altering gene expression. Mannitol acts rapidly by osmosis.
Acetazolamide is weak and self-limiting.
The osmotic and carbonic anhydrase agents are used for their specific effects
rather than their diuretic potency.
So onset and duration track the site and mechanism — the loop agents fast,
potent and brief; the thiazides moderate and sustained;
the aldosterone antagonists slow — which guides their selection for acute versus
chronic indications.
Give a final synthesis of the rational use of diuretics.
I would select the diuretic by indication, exploiting the differing site,
potency and electrolyte effects.
For acute fluid overload and pulmonary oedema, a loop diuretic, potent,
fast and effective even in renal impairment, given intravenously,
with a thiazide added for resistance through sequential nephron blockade,
watching for hypovolaemia, hypokalaemia and ototoxicity.
For hypertension, a thiazide-like agent such as indapamide for its sustained effect
and outcome evidence. For heart failure and cirrhotic ascites,
an aldosterone antagonist, prognostically beneficial in heart failure,
watching for hyperkalaemia.
For raised intracranial pressure, mannitol; for glaucoma and altitude sickness,
acetazolamide; for dilutional hyponatraemia, a vaptan with controlled correction.
I would monitor electrolytes, renal function and volume,
manage the key interactions — digoxin, renin-angiotensin blockers,
the triple whammy and lithium — and perioperatively correct electrolytes and
volume, often omit the diuretic on the day, and withhold SGLT2 inhibitors.
So rational use matches the agent and route to the indication and anticipates its
electrolyte, volume and interaction consequences.
Thank you. That was a clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Diuretics are classified by nephron site:
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (proximal tubule), osmotic (mannitol),
loop (thick ascending limb, NKCC2), thiazides (distal tubule, NCC),
and potassium-sparing (collecting duct — aldosterone antagonists and ENaC blockers).
Second, Loop diuretics are the most potent (fluid overload, pulmonary oedema;
effective in renal impairment) but cause hypovolaemia, hypokalaemia, hyponatraemia,
metabolic alkalosis and ototoxicity; they increase calcium excretion.
Third, Thiazides are moderate agents mainly for hypertension;
their hallmark effects are hypokalaemia, hyponatraemia, metabolic alkalosis,
plus hyperglycaemia, hyperuricaemia (gout) and hypercalcaemia.
Fourth, Potassium-sparing agents (spironolactone/eplerenone,
amiloride) conserve potassium — spironolactone improves survival in heart failure
and treats ascites — with hyperkalaemia the key danger Fifth,
Each class has a signature electrolyte/acid-base disturbance; perioperatively,
assess and correct potassium and volume, often omit the diuretic on the day,
and watch for arrhythmia (hypokalaemia) and hypotension (hypovolaemia).
Thank you. That concludes the station.